WASHINGTON — Hillary Clinton on Thursday delivered her most robust attack yet on her likely Republican opponent, Donald J. Trump, declaring him temperamentally unfit to be commander in chief. But although her campaign had described the speech as a major foreign policy address, Mrs. Clinton spent more time ridiculing and dismantling Mr. Trump’s statements than she did elucidating her positions. Here are a few key issues she did not discuss.

No-fly zone in Syria

In October 2015, Mrs. Clinton told a Boston television station, “I personally would be advocating now for a no-fly zone and humanitarian corridors to try to stop the carnage on the ground and from the air.” She repeated that call during a Democratic debate two months later. But President Obama has resisted such a move. The Pentagon is also leery: Military commanders warn that it would require substantial numbers of American ground forces and invite a deadly confrontation with the Syrians and the Russians. She has not fleshed out the proposal since then.

How to handle Vladimir V. Putin

Last fall, Mrs. Clinton said, “I am in the category of people who wanted to do more in response to the annexation of Crimea and the continuing destabilizing of Ukraine.” Her aides said she supported a proposal to funnel defensive weapons, like Javelin antitank missiles, to Ukrainian troops. Mr. Obama argued that this would escalate a showdown with Russia — one that Mr. Putin would inevitably win, given Ukraine’s proximity, and its greater strategic value, to Russia. On Thursday, Mrs. Clinton made no mention of steps she would take to counter Mr. Putin’s aggression, saying only that she had gone “toe to toe” with Moscow as secretary of state.

What to do about Libya

Mrs. Clinton played a pivotal role in persuading Mr. Obama to take part in the 2011 NATO air campaign that toppled Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi. She has expressed no regrets about the intervention, even after Libya fell into chaos and four Americans were killed in the attack on a diplomatic outpost in Benghazi. Her aides attribute the country’s woes to the unwillingness of its new leaders to accept a peacekeeping force. But Mrs. Clinton has said little about how the United States can help put Libya back together, other than calling for patient engagement. On Thursday, she left Libya off the list of knotty issues she and Mr. Obama had confronted.

How to defeat ISIS

After the terrorist attacks in Paris and in San Bernardino, Calif., last year, Mrs. Clinton called for an “intensification and acceleration” of Mr. Obama’s military campaign against the Islamic State. Her plan, unveiled in November at the Council on Foreign Relations, would consist of heavier airstrikes against Islamic State fighters, the possible deployment of additional Special Forces troops to help Arab and Kurdish forces in Syria and Iraq, and efforts to counter recruitment by the terrorist group over social media. On Thursday, she repeated that list, saying, “That, in a nutshell, is my plan for defeating ISIS.” She offered no further details.

How to confront Kim Jong-un

Mrs. Clinton excoriated Mr. Trump for, as she put it, gleefully praising the North Korean dictator for his brutal consolidation of power. She also talked about the importance of America’s allies in confronting the threat from Pyongyang over its nuclear program. After Mr. Trump said recently that he would be open to direct talks with Mr. Kim, Mrs. Clinton’s aides were sensitive to the suggestion that she had not been open to diplomacy. “She wasn’t averse to testing diplomacy with the North,” Jake Sullivan, her senior policy adviser, said in an interview. “She did have a cleareyed view of what was possible.” If elected, Mrs. Clinton appears likely to make full use of the sanctions imposed by the United Nations Security Council, including so-called secondary sanctions, which the United States can impose on entities that do business with North Korea. But she did not delve into those details on Thursday, nor did she discuss a North Korea policy that experts say is badly in need of review.